Streamable chat parsing (#45847)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/chat_response_parsing.md

documents. This document is about the other half of that glue layer: **Response templates**, the system for turning the
generated tokens output by the model back into a structured response dict. 

In many ways, response templates perform the inverse operation to chat templates. With chat templates, you feed in
a list of messages, and you get tokens ready to input to the model. With response templates, you feed in the raw
model output tokens, and you get a structured message. Like chat templates, response 
templates allow users to ignore the messy details of what specific formats and control tokens a model expects,
and use a universal API of message dicts that works with any model.

The best way to understand response templates is to see them in action. The main entry point is the
[`~PreTrainedTokenizerBase.parse_response`] method:

```python
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

checkpoint = "HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(checkpoint)
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(checkpoint, dtype="auto", device_map="auto")

messages = [{"role": "user", "content": "Summarize the end of the Cold War, very briefly."}]

> input_ids = tokenizer.apply_chat_template(messages, add_generation_prompt=True, return_tensors="pt").to(model.device)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
input_ids = tokenizer.apply_chat_template(messages, add_generation_prompt=True, return_tensors="pt")["input_ids"].to(model.device)
```

Also, reminder to use a model or revision with a valid `response_template`

templates to more models as quickly as we can!

## Streaming response parsing

In the above example, we parse the model response all at once after generation has finished. Often, though, we may
want to parse partial messages as they are generated, especially in user-facing apps where we don't just want to
display a static page for a minute or two until the model is finished.

When you want streaming parsing, call `tokenizer.get_response_parser()`, which returns a [`~utils.chat_parsing.ResponseParser`].
As with `parse_response`, pass the chat prompt as `prefix=` so the parser knows about any parts of the message that 
were prefilled by the chat template. The returned object is a
stateful parser that you can feed text into as the model generates it:

```python
parser = tokenizer.get_response_parser(prefix=input_ids[0])
for event in parser.initial_events:
    render(event)  # Display the partial message to the user however you want to
for chunk in model_output:
    for event in parser.feed(chunk):
        render(event)
message, final_events = parser.finalize()
for event in final_events:
    render(event)
```

> The parser will emit **events** as text is fed in, which indicate which region is currently being parsed. When

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parser will emit **events** as text from the generation process is fed in. This indicates which region is currently being generated. When
```

Trying to clarify the (usual) relationship with generation; perhaps we could provide a combined example that shows streaming generation with response parsing.

If the chat `prefix` wrote anything into the message (e.g. the template opened a thinking block, or an
assistant prefill started a response before handing off to the model), the parser exposes those events as
`parser.initial_events`, a list you can replay into your renderer before feeding any model output. Regions
that were opened *and* closed inside the prefix produce a full `region_open` / `region_chunk` / `region_close`
sequence and their parsed value lands in the output dict, exactly as if the model itself had written them.

A typical event stream for the SmolLM example above looks like:

```python
{"type": "region_open",  "field": "thinking"}
{"type": "region_chunk", "field": "thinking", "text": "Some chain ", "dirty": False}
{"type": "region_chunk", "field": "thinking", "text": "of thought...", "dirty": False}
{"type": "region_close", "field": "thinking", "value": "Some chain of thought..."}
{"type": "region_open",  "field": "tool_calls"}
{"type": "region_chunk", "field": "tool_calls", "text": '{"name": "greet_user", ', "dirty": True}
{"type": "region_chunk", "field": "tool_calls", "text": '"arguments": {"greeting": "Hi!"}}', "dirty": True}

> {"type": "region_close", "field": "tool_calls", "value": {"type": "function", "function": {"name": "greet_user", "arguments": {"greeting": "Hi!"}}}}

Reviewer: In that case we should update the prompt and pass the tools so it triggers the greet_user call, just as it's done later in the advanced usage section.

Author: Fixed the text! I don't want to make the example too complex by adding tool definitions, so I just changed the text so I don't say the event stream matches the example above.

Reviewer: Sounds good!

| `close_pattern` | str (regex)        | Regex alternative to `close`. Named groups become capture variables available to `transform`. |
| `repeats`       | bool               | If true, the field is a list and each match appends. Default `false`.                         |
| `optional`      | bool               | If false and the region never matches, we raise an error. Default `true`.                     |

A field should have **either** `open` or `open_pattern`, but not both, and the same is true for `close` and `close_pattern`.

A field with **neither** `open` nor `open_pattern` is the **implicit** field: it's active whenever no explicit
region is open, so it captures leftover text. At most one field can be implicit. This is most often used when `content`
does not have special token tags, it's just written as plaintext after the other fields.

In addition to opening and closing delimiters, you can also specify `repeats`, which indicates that the field is a list
and the delimiters can match multiple times. This is most common for parallel tool calling, when a model emits
multiple tool calls simultaneously.

> Finally, you can specify `optional: false` for fields that must be present. If parsing finishes and an optional field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, you can specify `optional: false` for fields that must be present. If parsing finishes and a non optional field
```

| `text`       | string        | `strip` (default `true`). Set to `false` to preserve trailing whitespace                        |
| `int`        | int           | `strip` (default `true`)                                                                        |
| `float`      | float         | `strip` (default `true`)                                                                        |
| `bool`       | bool          | `strip` (default `true`); accepts `"true"`/`"1"` (case-insensitive) as true                     |
| `json`       | any           | `allow_non_json`, `unquoted_keys`, `string_delims: [[open, close],...]`                         |
| `xml-inline` | dict          | `tag_pattern` (regex w/ named groups `key`/`value`), `value_parser`, `merge_duplicates`         |
| `kv-lines`   | dict          | `line_sep`, `kv_sep`, `value_parser`, `strip` (default `true`)                                  |

The `json` parser also accepts dialect arguments (`unquoted_keys`, `string_delims`) for models that emit JSON with cute
quirks that completely break the standard parser. The model authors who are responsible for this being necessary

> know who they are and should feel an appropriate amount of shame.

Reviewer: 😂

Reviewer 2: This comment should never be resolved. LOVE IT. 😂

    "repeats": True,
    "content": "json",
    "transform": "{type: 'function', function: {name: name, arguments: content}}",
},
```

The `transform` here builds the output dict: Most of what we need is emitted by GPT-OSS in the field body, which
forms the `content` input. We get `name` by capturing it in the `open_pattern` regex, and merge it with `content` into
a tool call dict. Finally, we wrap the tool call dict in an outer dict, which adds `type: "function"` as in the SmolLM
example.

In general, the `jmespath` syntax is very straightforward. `jmespath` experts may be familiar with the
special symbols `@` (meaning the entire input dict, including any capture groups) and `*` (the input iterator). These are usually not necessary,
but they are supported if you really need them. The main case when `*` becomes necessary is when the field content
is a list and we want to transform every element, which often occurs with Cohere models:

```python
"transform": "content[*].{type: 'function', function: {name: tool_name, arguments: parameters}}"
```

Using `transform` requires the optional `jmespath` package (`pip install jmespath`); it's only imported when a template

> actually uses the key.

Reviewer: Maybe mention the `transformers["chat_template"]` extra that includes this?

Author: Done!

to our standard API. GPT-OSS is a good example - it embeds the function name in the channel header rather than in
the JSON body, so we have to capture it with a named group in `open_pattern` and merge it with `content` inside the
transform. All named groups in `open_pattern` and `close_pattern` become available as variables alongside `content`:

```python
"tool_calls": {
    "open_pattern": r"<\|channel\|>commentary to=functions\.(?P<name>\w+).*?<\|message\|>",
    "close": "<|call|>",
    "repeats": True,
    "content": "json",
    "transform": {"type": "function", "function": {"name": "{name}", "arguments": "{content}"}},
},
```

Sometimes a field's parsed content is *itself* a list of records and you want to reshape each one. The Cohere
template is a good example: It emits all tool calls inside a single JSON array, so we set `transform_each: True` to 
apply the transform per element. Each array element's keys are unpacked into the template scope, so 
`"{tool_name}"` looks up `tool_name` in the current element:

```python
"tool_calls": {
    "open": "<|START_ACTION|>",
    "close": "<|END_ACTION|>",
    "content": "json",
    "transform_each": True,

>     "transform": {"type": "function", "function": {"name": "{tool_name}", "arguments": "{parameters}"}},

Reviewer: Perhaps we could show a fragment of a rendered Cohere tool call so readers understand it contains `tool_name` and `parameters`.

Author: Added a little example to clarify!

`open_pattern`, `close_pattern`, and `start_anchor_pattern` are regex strings. For most users, and even for most
model authors, this shouldn't be a problem, but if you are a developer writing an implementation of response parsing
in another language, you should be aware of our implementation details. We apologize
to everyone who had to implement an entire Jinja parser to get chat templating to work - we hope that if you follow the
simple guidelines below, then response templates should be much less painful:

- We use Python's `re` module for regexes. Since all Python3 strings are unicode, this means **all of our regex matches
  are unicode-aware.** This particularly affects common characters like `\w`. Make sure you set the relevant
  unicode flags in your engine.
- We compile all regexes with `re.DOTALL` enabled and `re.MULTILINE` disabled, so `.` matches `\n` but `^` and `$`
  only match the start/end of the whole input, not line breaks.
- We use the `(?P<name>...)` syntax for named groups. In some regex implementations, angle brackets `<>` are treated
  as part of the name, so this would capture a group called `"<name>"`. If your implementation of regex does this, you'll

>   need to get rid of the extra angle brackets somehow, or else the groups will not match later `transform` expressions.

Reviewer: It's more about the `P` in `?P<` vs `?<`, [this is what I'm currently doing](https://github.com/huggingface/swift-transformers/blob/48b3171cf28fbf025ee77709d4f18319ec994316/Sources/Tokenizers/ResponseTemplate.swift#L268-L273).

Author: Should be resolved in the docs now!

output dict. Fields also include information for parsing the text inside their delimiters. There's one subtlety: The
`content` field has no `open`, because in SmolLM (and several other models), it's not marked by a special token. Instead,
`content` is stored in the space after the other regions, but before the end of the sequence. In our template, we
represent this as an **implicit / leftover** field that picks up any text not claimed by another region.

In addition to `fields`, the template supports two top-level keys:

- `defaults` (optional) — A dict of values pre-populated in the output (e.g. `{"role": "assistant"}`). Keys here are
  always retained in the parsed output, even if no field wrote to them; other keys are dropped when their field
  captured nothing.
- `start_anchor` (str) / `start_anchor_pattern` (str regex) — Marks where the current assistant message
  begins inside a chat prompt. When you pass `prefix=` to `parse_response` or `get_response_parser`, the parser
  right-truncates the prefix past the **last** occurrence of this anchor before processing it, so earlier turns in

>   a multi-turn conversation don't pollute the current message's state. The anchor is applied only to the `prefix`,

Reviewer 3: I think this message about multi-turn belongs in the initial context as well. This was kind of what I was wondering about reading from top to bottom

Author: Amended the intro to explain this a bit better!

  never to the response/generation you parse — some formats legitimately re-emit it mid-message (gpt-oss harmony
  output opens every channel with `<|start|>assistant`), so stripping the response past the anchor would drop the
  model's own reasoning and tool calls. This is why the generation alone is never enough to guard against history
  bleed: pass the prompt as `prefix=`. For ChatML-style models the anchor is typically `"<|im_start|>assistant\n"`.
  Exactly one of `start_anchor` or `start_anchor_pattern` must be set.

> 

Reviewer 4: example / walkthrough would help!

Author: Added!

As with chat templates, response templates are stored as tokenizer attributes and saved with the tokenizer. Unlike
chat templates, we save them inside `tokenizer_config.json` and not as a separate file, because their format fits

> naturally in JSON, unlike a chat template Jinja script.

Reviewer 3: Hmm might be a dumb question but why was the chat template jinja but this response parser json? Do we not introduce attack vectors with any simple json?

Author: No, Python's JSON parser is safe against untrusted input! I think most languages should have a JSON parser that's safe, or at least that can be configured to be safe. It should be a lot easier to secure than Jinja.

| `repeats`       | bool               | If true, the field is a list and each match appends. Default `false`.                         |
| `optional`      | bool               | If false and the region never matches, we raise an error. Default `true`.                     |

A field should have **either** `open` or `open_pattern`, but not both, and the same is true for `close` and `close_pattern`.

A field with **neither** `open` nor `open_pattern` is the **implicit** field: it's active whenever no explicit
region is open, so it captures leftover text. At most one field can be implicit. This is most often used when `content`
does not have special token tags, it's just written as plaintext after the other fields.

In addition to opening and closing delimiters, you can also specify `repeats`, which indicates that the field is a list
and the delimiters can match multiple times. This is most common for parallel tool calling, when a model emits
multiple tool calls simultaneously.

Finally, you can specify `optional: false` for fields that must be present. If parsing finishes and a non optional field
was never opened, we raise an error instead of silently omitting the field.

> The end of generation will close and finalize any open regions, even if their closing delimiter was not seen.

Reviewer 4: small examples here again can help otherwise its hard to visualize

Author: Scattered a few small examples here!

| `content_args`   | dict         | Arguments to be passed to the content parser for this region.                            |
| `transform`      | dict/list    | Optional post-parse template that reshapes the parsed body (see **Transform**).          |
| `transform_each` | bool         | If true, the parsed content must be a list and `transform` is applied per-element.       |

The first (and most important) key is `content`. This indicates the content type
of the field, which determines the parser that will be used to convert the raw text captured in the field to the final output.
`content_args` are used to configure the parser, and allow us to support various format quirks without needing custom code.
We'll take a look at each type of parser and its arguments in turn.

#### Basic types
`text`, `int`, `float` and `bool` are the basic types. These content types all just strip whitespace and then do a simple
type conversion if required. They do not have any `content_args`, except for `text` which supports the arg `strip`,
which strips whitespace from the start and end of the captured text, and defaults to `true`.

> #### json

Reviewer 4: i would put small example for each type here

Author: Done!

  `{"name": ..., "args": ...}` format as for `xml-inline`. If omitted, values stay as raw strings.

Lines that are empty or do not contain `kv_sep` are silently skipped, so stray blank lines in the
captured region are tolerated.

### Transform

For most fields, the `transform` key is unnecessary. It's used when the parsed body needs to be reshaped into the final
output, or when information from the delimiters has to be merged into the result. It most commonly appears in
`tool_calls` fields, as these often have complex structure.

`transform` is a **template**: a dict (or list) that describes the output shape, where any string of the
form `"{name}"` is replaced with the corresponding value. Values can be accessed from `content` (the parsed
body of this region) and any named groups captured by `open_pattern` / `close_pattern`. A very common use-case is to wrap a tool
call dict in an outer dict with a `function` key, as these are part of our standard tool call format:

```python
"tool_calls": {
    "open": "<tool_call>",
    "close": "</tool_call>",
    "repeats": True,
    "content": "json",
    "transform": {"type": "function", "function": "{content}"},
},

> ```

Reviewer 4: i would show again how that would render

A whole-string placeholder like `"{content}"` returns the looked-up value with its type preserved — so above, the
parsed JSON dict slots in directly as the value of `function`. A placeholder must be the entire string: mixing
text and placeholders (`"abc {name} def"`) is not permitted. They're not f-strings!

You can abuse `transform` quite a lot, which becomes necessary when the model output has a wildly different format
to our standard API. GPT-OSS is a good example - it embeds the function name in the channel header rather than in
the JSON body, so we have to capture it with a named group in `open_pattern` and merge it with `content` inside the
transform. All named groups in `open_pattern` and `close_pattern` become available as variables alongside `content`:

```python
"tool_calls": {
    "open_pattern": r"<\|channel\|>commentary to=functions\.(?P<name>\w+).*?<\|message\|>",
    "close": "<|call|>",
    "repeats": True,
    "content": "json",
    "transform": {"type": "function", "function": {"name": "{name}", "arguments": "{content}"}},
},

> ```

Reviewer 4: again would like to see example!!!

Reviewer 4: like out -> becomes what with this

Sometimes a field's parsed content is *itself* a list of records and you want to reshape each one. The Cohere
template is a good example: It emits all tool calls inside a single JSON array, so we set `transform_each: True` to 
apply the transform per element. Each array element's keys are unpacked into the template scope, so 
`"{tool_name}"` looks up `tool_name` in the current element:

```python
"tool_calls": {
    "open": "<|START_ACTION|>",
    "close": "<|END_ACTION|>",
    "content": "json",
    "transform_each": True,
    "transform": {"type": "function", "function": {"name": "{tool_name}", "arguments": "{parameters}"}},
},
```

This will convert an output like this:

```json
[
    {"tool_name": "greet_user", "parameters": {"greeting": "Hi!"}},
    {"tool_name": "search", "parameters": {"query": "weather tomorrow"}}
]

> ```

Reviewer 4: is the output the string? model outputs JSON like right?

Author: Yeah, the model outputs a JSON-like string, and we parse it and convert it to dicts in the correct format to append to the chat.

Into an output like this, which fits our standard API:

```json
[
    {"type": "function", "function": {"name": "greet_user", "arguments": {"greeting": "Hi!"}}},
    {"type": "function", "function": {"name": "search", "arguments": {"query": "weather tomorrow"}}}
]
```

The `transform_each` flag is only needed when `content` is already a list; for the more common case where each
match contributes one element (and `repeats: True` accumulates them), then the transform will apply to each element
by default.

> 

Reviewer 4: very nice

## Very advanced: Regex portability

`open_pattern`, `close_pattern`, and `start_anchor_pattern` are regex strings. For most users, and even for most
model authors, this shouldn't be a problem, but if you are a developer writing an implementation of response parsing
in another language, you should be aware of our implementation details. This section is dedicated to everyone
who had to implement an entire Jinja parser to get non-Python chat templating to work - we hope that if you

> follow the simple guidelines below, then response templates should be much less painful:

Reviewer 3: This feels personal 😆

Author: I still feel guilty because I didn't think too much about non-Python frameworks when I chose Jinja 😅

input = "<n> 42 </n>"
# Returns: {"count": 42}
```

#### json

The `json` parser parses the captured text as JSON. It's the workhorse for tool-call arguments and
anything else with nested structure. It accepts a handful of optional `content_args` to handle the
various ways models mangle JSON in the wild:

- `unquoted_keys` (bool, default `false`): rewrite bare-identifier keys (e.g. `{name: "foo"}`) into
  quoted form (`{"name": "foo"}`) before parsing. Useful for models that emit Javascript-style
  object literals rather than strict JSON.
- `string_delims` (list of `[open, close]` pairs, optional): for models that wrap string
  values in custom delimiters instead of `"..."`. Each pair gives an opening and closing marker;
  matching regions are extracted and spliced back in as standard JSON strings before parsing.
- `allow_non_json` (bool, default `false`): if parsing fails, return the stripped raw text instead
  of raising. Useful as a fallback for fields where the model *usually* emits JSON but occasionally
  drops to plain text.

The model authors responsible for the existence of `unquoted_keys` and `string_delims` know who

> they are and should feel an appropriate amount of shame.

Reviewer 3: 😂 but we should refrain from formulating it as this lol

Author: Fixed :cry:

form `"{name}"` is replaced with the corresponding value. Values can be accessed from `content` (the parsed
body of this region) and any named groups captured by `open_pattern` / `close_pattern`. A very common use-case is to wrap a tool
call dict in an outer dict with a `function` key, as these are part of our standard tool call format:

```python
"tool_calls": {
    "open": "<tool_call>",
    "close": "</tool_call>",
    "repeats": True,
    "content": "json",
    "transform": {"type": "function", "function": "{content}"},
},
```

So this raw output:

```txt
<tool_call>{"name": "greet_user", "arguments": {"greeting": "Hi!"}}</tool_call>
```

becomes (note `repeats: True` makes `tool_calls` a list):

```json
[{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "greet_user", "arguments": {"greeting": "Hi!"}}}]
```

A whole-string placeholder like `"{content}"` returns the looked-up value with its type preserved — so above, the
parsed JSON dict slots in directly as the value of `function`. A placeholder must be the entire string: mixing
text and placeholders (`"abc {name} def"`) is not permitted. They're not f-strings!

> You can abuse `transform` quite a lot, which becomes necessary when the model output has a wildly different format

Reviewer 3: wording :D abusing -> versatile

Author: Fixed!

```

This will convert an output like this:

```json
[
    {"tool_name": "greet_user", "parameters": {"greeting": "Hi!"}},
    {"tool_name": "search", "parameters": {"query": "weather tomorrow"}}
]
```

Into an output like this, which fits our standard API:

```json
[
    {"type": "function", "function": {"name": "greet_user", "arguments": {"greeting": "Hi!"}}},
    {"type": "function", "function": {"name": "search", "arguments": {"query": "weather tomorrow"}}}
]
```

The `transform_each` flag is only needed when `content` is already a list; for the more common case where each
match contributes one element (and `repeats: True` accumulates them), then the transform will apply to each element
by default.

## Very advanced: Regex portability

`open_pattern`, `close_pattern`, and `start_anchor_pattern` are regex strings. For most users, and even for most
model authors, this shouldn't be a problem, but if you are a developer writing an implementation of response parsing
in another language, you should be aware of our implementation details. This section is dedicated to everyone
who had to implement an entire Jinja parser to get non-Python chat templating to work - we hope that if you

> follow the simple guidelines below, then response templates should be much less painful:

Reviewer 3: nit: do we want to wrap this in a details / summary section

Author: I think it's okay down at the bottom under the 'for developers' block, but we can change later if it's annoying!
